<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li data-se-note-number="1" id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of John Stuart Mill</i>, chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. (Walter Scott.) <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#note-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="2" id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 190. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#note-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="3" id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 242. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#note-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="4" id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 246⁠–⁠247. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#note-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="5" id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Cf.</abbr> an instructive page in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Autobiography</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 252. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#note-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="6" id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These words had scarcely been written, when, as if to give them an emphatic contradiction, occurred the Government Press Prosecutions of 1858. That ill-judged interference with the liberty of public discussion has not, however, induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has it at all weakened my conviction that, moments of panic excepted, the era of pains and penalties for political discussion has, in our own country, passed away. For, in the first place, the prosecutions were not persisted in; and, in the second, they were never, properly speaking, political prosecutions. The offence charged was not that of criticising institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but of circulating what was deemed an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of Tyrannicide.</p>
					<p>If the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there ought to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered. It would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to examine here, whether the doctrine of Tyrannicide deserves that title. I shall content myself with saying, that the subject has been at all times one of the open questions of morals; that the act of a private citizen in striking down a criminal, who, by raising himself above the law, has placed himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, has been accounted by whole nations, and by some of the best and wisest of men, not a crime, but an act of exalted virtue; and that, right or wrong, it is not of the nature of assassination, but of civil war. As such, I hold that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a proper subject of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a probable connection can be established between the act and the instigation. Even then, it is not a foreign government, but the very government assailed, which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can legitimately punish attacks directed against its own existence. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#note-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="7" id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Pooley, Bodmin Assizes, July 31, 1857. In December following, he received a free pardon from the Crown. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#note-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="8" id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Jacob Holyoake, August 17, 1857; Edward Truelove, July, 1857. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#note-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="9" id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Baron de Gleichen, Marlborough-Street Police Court, August 4, 1857. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#note-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="10" id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ample warning may be drawn from the large infusion of the passions of a persecutor, which mingled with the general display of the worst parts of our national character on the occasion of the Sepoy insurrection. The ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may be unworthy of notice; but the heads of the Evangelical party have announced as their principle, for the government of Hindoos and Mahomedans, that no schools be supported by public money in which the Bible is not taught, and by necessary consequence that no public employment be given to any but real or pretended Christians. An Under-Secretary of State, in a speech delivered to his constituents on the 12th of November, 1857, is reported to have said: “Toleration of their faith” (the faith of a hundred millions of British subjects), “the superstition which they called religion, by the British Government, had had the effect of retarding the ascendency of the British name, and preventing the salutary growth of Christianity. … Toleration was the great corner-stone of the religious liberties of this country; but do not let them abuse that precious word toleration. As he understood it, it meant the complete liberty to all, freedom of worship, <em>among Christians, who worshipped upon the same foundation</em>. It meant toleration of all sects and denominations of <em>Christians who believed in the one mediation</em>.” I desire to call attention to the fact, that a man who has been deemed fit to fill a high office in the government of this country, under a liberal Ministry, maintains the doctrine that all who do not believe in the divinity of Christ are beyond the pale of toleration. Who, after this imbecile display, can indulge the illusion that religious persecution has passed away, never to return? <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#note-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="11" id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Sphere and Duties of Government</i>, from the German of Baron Wilhelm von Humboldt, pp. 11⁠–⁠13. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="12" id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sterling’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="13" id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is something both contemptible and frightful in the sort of evidence on which, of late years, any person can be judicially declared unfit for the management of his affairs; and after his death, his disposal of his property can be set aside, if there is enough of it to pay the expenses of litigation⁠—which are charged on the property itself. All the minute details of his daily life are pried into, and whatever is found which, seen through the medium of the perceiving and describing faculties of the lowest of the low, bears an appearance unlike absolute commonplace, is laid before the jury as evidence of insanity, and often with success; the jurors being little, if at all, less vulgar and ignorant than the witnesses; while the judges, with that extraordinary want of knowledge of human nature and life which continually astonishes us in English lawyers, often help to mislead them. These trials speak volumes as to the state of feeling and opinion among the vulgar with regard to human liberty. So far from setting any value on individuality⁠—so far from respecting the rights of each individual to act, in things indifferent, as seems good to his own judgment and inclinations, judges and juries cannot even conceive that a person in a state of sanity can desire such freedom. In former days, when it was proposed to burn atheists, charitable people used to suggest putting them in a madhouse instead: it would be nothing surprising nowadays were we to see this done, and the doers applauding themselves, because, instead of persecuting for religion, they had adopted so humane and Christian a mode of treating these unfortunates, not without a silent satisfaction at their having thereby obtained their deserts. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="14" id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The case of the Bombay Parsees is a curious instance in point. When this industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the Persian fire-worshippers, flying from their native country before the Caliphs, arrived in Western India, they were admitted to toleration by the Hindoo sovereigns, on condition of not eating beef. When those regions afterwards fell under the dominion of Mahomedan conquerors, the Parsees obtained from them a continuance of indulgence, on condition of refraining from pork. What was at first obedience to authority became a second nature, and the Parsees to this day abstain both from beef and pork. Though not required by their religion, the double abstinence has had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and custom, in the East, is a religion. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#note-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
